I am writing to express my enthusiastic interest in the inaugural American Society of Nephrology Champion role for the American Society of Nephrology Partnership for Responsible Augmented Intelligence in Kidney Medicine. As a passionate advocate for leveraging technology and innovation in health care, I am eager to contribute my expertise to advance the Society’s efforts in responsibly embracing artificial intelligence to enhance patient care, research and education for renal medicine.
Growing up in northern Bosnia, I bore witness to the impact of Balkan Endemic Nephropathy, which has since underscored my dedication to improving the lives of individuals facing kidney-related challenges. My internationally recognized, cross disciplinary career as a nephrology physician-scientist has been dedicated to promoting patient-centric care — including harnessing the power of artificial intelligence to optimize kidney outcomes. These developments have included  pioneering innovative technologies and pervasive sensing for acute kidney injury diagnosis and monitoring, as well as predictive models and risk stratification tools that enable early detection and intervention. However, these achievements do not only represent technological advancements, but also pave the way for individualized treatments. I am committed to centering the “patient voice” when providing technologically aided care, leveraging artificial intelligence in a fashion that respects the unique challenges and preferences of individuals facing kidney-related issues. 
I am a survivor of the Bosnian genocide as a religious minority, and my pathway from a refugee to American citizen ran parallel to my professional career. My personal experience of war, persecution, and displacement inevitably shaped my personal and professional interests, beliefs, and alliances. I am an outspoken activist for inclusiveness and equity in medicine, both as a holistic mentor and a catalyst for new ideas and connections. I have mentored more than 80 undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students and have organized educational activities for the professional development of women in medicine on a national level. My clinical work, research, and teaching are aligned with my vision for intelligent, human-centered health care, where innovation, technology, diversity, and inclusive excellence are aligned to deliver a quality experience for every patient, caregiver, and provider. My research focuses on a trustworthy, reproducible, sustainable, and ethical computing framework for developing and deploying state-of-the-art artificial intelligence and pervasive sensing techniques for medical applications. I am also a member of the Society of Critical Care Medicine Data Science Task Force, working to develop a national roadmap for integrating artificial intelligence in critical care.
Through my multiple roles at the University of Florida College of Medicine, including R. Glenn Davis Professor of Medicine, Surgery, Anesthesiology, Physiology and Functional Genomics, Senior Associate Dean for Research, Director of the Intelligent Clinical Care Center and Director of the Precision and Intelligent Systems in Medicine Research Partnership, I also provide leadership for transformative scholarship and education that uses cutting-edge technology to advance patient care. My cross-disciplinary training, research, and clinical practice uniquely position me as an emerging leader in the field of biomedical artificial intelligence. I am also a nationally and internationally recognized expert in medical artificial intelligence, informatics, as well as clinical and translational research. Earlier this year, I was interviewed on NBC Nightly News and National Public Radio about the future of artificial intelligence in clinical care. As a champion of translational research, I have spearheaded innovation that had led to the creation of multiple, National Institutes of Health and NVIDIA-supported projects within a span of just five years, including an artificial intelligence-aided patient assessment tool for real-time health care recommendations, a digital, twinned intensive care unit used to optimize real-world health care delivery and a surgical care optimization platform  — all with the aim to enhance patient well-being. Under my leadership, the University of Florida College of Medicine has developed a robust program in biomedical artificial intelligence, which has included leading an effort to establish an “AI in Research” Hub for 27 newly recruited tenured track faculty with over $30 million in National Institutes of Health funding. Utilizing this experience as a knowledge-base, I am well-positioned to speed the development of high-quality artificial intelligence efforts within the field of nephrology.
Bringing advancement to the forefront of nephrology will require incorporating artificial intelligence across the educational continuum, a mission that I have already begun to pursue at the statewide and national levels. Within the University of Florida College of Medicine and beyond, I have championed transformative medical artificial intelligence education and mentorship programs, introducing recurrent AI Bootcamps and AI for Clinical Care Workshops. These programs cater to health care providers across multiple specialties, accommodating varying levels of artificial intelligence expertise. My commitment to advancing artificial intelligence education also extends to shaping the next generation of biomedical professionals through the Emerging Research Scholarship AI PhD Program — a specialized PhD that offers students training in artificial intelligence and data science across diverse domains. Additionally, I orchestrate the annual AI2Heal Data/Hackathon, which encourages researchers to participate in intensive coding projects and use generative artificial intelligence to advance health outcomes. The forthcoming AI Passport for Health program, a strategic initiative endorsed by our university president for upskilling the health care workforce, exemplifies my dedication to empowering health professionals to integrate artificial intelligence into their careers. In addition to this initiative, I am also leading the development of new graduate programs at University of Florida College of Medicine — AI for Spatial Biology and AI for Health. Facilitating a profound understanding of how technological discoveries can revolutionize medical practice is also a key focus of the multi-day, AI4Health Conference in Orlando, where I serve as a mentor for trainees, physicians and early-stage medical investigators.
However, my effectiveness as an educator is inseparable from my desire to approach research, instruction and patient care collaboratively. Nationally, I play a pivotal role in the NIH’s $23.5 million Bridge2AI program alongside seven other investigators, contributing to the creation of a comprehensive data repository of artificial intelligence research from over 100,000 critically ill patients across multiple university health systems. Within Bridge2AI, I lead the $3.6 million-funded University of Florida project “A Patient-Focused Collaborative Hospital Repository Uniting Standards for Equitable AI,” which is dedicated to establishing an artificial intelligence infrastructure for critical care medicine. This initiative emphasizes extracting health data from a socioeconomically and culturally diverse sample, striving to enhance health outcomes for all. My commitment to diversity is further evidenced in additional initiatives, such as my support of the Society’s NephSaps program. Together, these efforts highlight my unwavering dedication to advancing nephrology and medicine through nurturing an inclusive, artificial intelligence-equipped and diverse health care workforce of the future.
The implementation of artificial intelligence in medicine is a new frontier in health research and innovation. My cross-disciplinary training, research, and clinical practice uniquely position me as an emergent leader in this field. In the next stage of my career, I aim to participate in large-scale efforts to define the foundation of trustworthy, reproducible, sustainable, and ethical artificial intelligence in medicine. I am interested in engaging in policy and regulatory issues pertinent to its use to augment human decisions. The domains of algorithmic fairness and reproducibility are particularly relevant in nephrology and critical care medicine, where health care providers, patients, and caregivers make life and death decisions under extreme uncertainty and pressure. Social determinants of health play a crucial, yet underappreciated role in determining acute illness outcomes, and the ideal framework for their inclusion in clinical algorithms is still unknown. The network of American Society of Nephrology members and scholars offers invaluable resources for providing an environment that amplifies my leadership in AI policy, research and implementation. I am excited about the prospect of leading this groundbreaking effort and  confident that, together, we can drive innovation while maintaining ethical and responsible practices for the implementation of augmented intelligence in kidney care. Thank you for considering my application. I look forward to the opportunity to discuss how my skills and experiences align with the goals of the Society in greater detail.
This year marks twenty-five years of my professional and personal dedication to academic medicine and scholarship in the Unites States public higher education system. The University of Florida and the Gainesville community welcomed me in 1999 as a fellow of the International Society of Nephrology and as a refugee from the Bosnian genocide. My professional growth and transformation into an accomplished cross-disciplinary physician-scientist and a leader in medical artificial intelligence and data science research were inevitable consequences of the unique constellation of exceptional people, programs, resources, and opportunities. The University of Florida, with sixteen colleges, an academic healthcare center and numerous research centers and institutes on one contiguous campus, has provided me with an exceptional environment for growth. I am proud to consider myself an integral part of the unstoppable momentum of Power of Together, the vision that propelled the University of Florida Health as a leading academic center in the State of Florida. As a practicing intensivist and nephrologist, I am on the frontline to serve patients and the community and deliver innovative, high-quality, and high-value medical care. That perspective has guided my entire research career and continues to center my scientific quest towards the ultimate purpose of improving health and alleviating suffering. 
Biomedical research and education are at an inflection point where the complexity and multitude of underlying genetic, structural, molecular, clinical, or social mechanisms of health and disease are turning into an advantage. We use genome-wide associations, polygenic risk scores, predictive algorithms, mechanistic and machine learning models to engineer, optimize or discover new metabolic processes, protein structure, drug combinations, disease trajectories, or clinical outcomes. Our success in harnessing this big biomedical data will rely on leveraging structure, prediction, and expanded data scale. The new initiatives, such as Human Cell Atlas, International Common Disease Alliance, Precision Medicine, and Artificial Intelligence for Biomedical Excellence, will require not only new data platforms and algorithms but also a “broader ecosystem of partnerships in medicine that engages interaction between clinical experts and computer scientists, engineers, and mathematicians (Nat Med. 2019; 25:1804).” The new research partnerships will engage a diversely trained workforce in transdisciplinary collaborations to create a unity of intellectual frameworks beyond the disciplinary perspectives. They will call for a new paradigm for training and collaborating to ensure inclusive excellence and success. We are on the cusp of the movement that can bring together traditionally segregated foundational scientific disciplines with clinical and translational science workforce for a new unified mission to transform medicine and healthcare.   
My cross-disciplinary training, research, clinical practice and academic leadership experience uniquely position me as an emerging leader for these times. I am the R. Glenn Davis Professor with Tenure of Medicine, Surgery, Anesthesiology, Physiology and Functional Genomics and Biomedical Informatics at the University of Florida College of Medicine with multidisciplinary training in internal medicine, nephrology, critical care medicine, informatics, and data science. My clinical work, research, and teaching are aligned with my vision for intelligent human-centered health care, where innovation, technology, and inclusive excellence are aligned to deliver optimal quality and experience for every patient, caregiver, and provider. My research focuses on a trustworthy, reproducible, sustainable, and ethical computing framework for developing and deploying state-of-the-art artificial intelligence and pervasive sensing techniques for medical applications. I am a nationally and internationally recognized expert in artificial intelligence for health applications, clinical informatics, and translational research. I served as a member of the Society of Critical Care Medicine Data Science Task Force, developing a national roadmap for integrating artificial intelligence in critical care.
I have founded the University of Florida Intelligent Clinical Care Center, bringing together experts in computer science, engineering, informatics, medicine, law, humanities and digital art to establish a national and international reputation in medical artificial intelligence and informatics. My research portfolio of close to $64 million was funded since 2010, leading to more than 250 peer-reviewed manuscripts and more than 18,000 citations. I have mentored numerous undergraduate students, graduate and postdoctoral trainees, house staff, and junior faculty with > 50% women and under-represented groups in medicine. I have successfully implemented the first real-time artificial intelligence private cloud for intelligent surgical and critical care modeling at the University of Florida and developed world-class large multimodal AI-ready datasets. I have forged a highly collaborative AI effort across campus with an exemplary team-science approach and defined the foundation of a trustworthy, reproducible, sustainable, and ethical artificial intelligence in acute care medicine. Nationally, I play a pivotal role in the NIH’s $23 million Bridge2AI program alongside seven other investigators, contributing to the creation of a comprehensive data repository of artificial intelligence research from over 100,000 critically ill patients across multiple university health systems. Within Bridge2AI, I lead the $3.6 million-funded project “A Patient-Focused Collaborative Hospital Repository Uniting Standards for Equitable AI,” at University of Florida which is dedicated to establishing an artificial intelligence infrastructure for critical care medicine.
I have had the privilege to serve as a senior associate dean for research at the University of Florida College of Medicine since November 2021. In this role, I implemented a transformative research strategic plan to expand the College of Medicine’s research enterprise, strengthen its scientific and societal impact in Florida, and elevate our national reputation. My vision to accelerate translation of research discovery to impact through the adoption of digital innovation, radical collaboration, and workforce augmentation was implemented via strategic data-driven initiatives geared to cultivate a resilient research community of exceptional individuals embedded in an environment with world-class infrastructure and a culture that nurtures creativity, curiosity, problem-solving, collaboration, and sustainability. I expanded the Office of Research team from three staff members to a multidisciplinary team of three assistant deans, a director of research operations and strategic development and twenty staff members to deliver wide range of services from research administration and management, sustainable research space and facility management, clinical research hub, research workforce development programs, medical entrepreneurship and innovation programs, artificial intelligence collaborative, and research analytics.     
Under my leadership, University of Florida College of Medicine NIH extramural funding increased by $64 million leading to an 11-point increase in our national ranking in total NIH awards (Blue Ridge overall ranking from 52nd in 2020 to 41st in 2023, and from 27th in 2020 to 21st for public medical schools in 2023). Ten of our programs were ranked among the top twenty programs in public medical schools nationwide for the first time. Moreover, the Office of Research assisted in recruiting 159 faculty (including five department chairs) with research assignments, almost 50% of whom were tenure tracked. Altogether, new faculty recruits brought in close to $30 million in extramural funds and our team secured 74,000 square feet of research and office space for the new recruits. In 2020, a large-scale University of Florida Artificial Intelligence Initiative was spurred by the $80M research and education partnership with NVIDIA, leading to a new data center that houses the fastest supercomputer in higher education. I led the efforts at the University of Florida College of Medicine to develop a robust program in biomedical artificial intelligence and establish a Biomedical AI Collaborative hosting 27 newly recruited tenured track AI faculty and supporting investigators across the campus to use AI and data science to advance health and scientific discovery. 
Bringing advancement to the forefront of medicine in the next decade will require transformative shifts in medical education and postgraduate training. I was part of the core team that led the successful Liaison Committee on Medical Education re-accreditation process for the University of Florida College of Medicine in 2023. Within the University of Florida College of Medicine and beyond, I have championed innovative medical artificial intelligence education and mentorship programs, introducing recurrent AI Bootcamps and AI for Clinical Care Workshops. These programs cater to health care providers across multiple specialties, accommodating varying levels of artificial intelligence expertise. My commitment to advancing artificial intelligence education also extends to shaping the next generation of biomedical professionals through the Emerging Research Scholarship AI PhD Program - a specialized PhD that offers students training in artificial intelligence and data science across diverse domains. Additionally, I orchestrate the annual AI2Heal Hackathon, which encourages researchers to participate in intensive coding projects and use generative artificial intelligence to advance health outcomes. The forthcoming AI Passport for Health program, a strategic initiative funded by the University of Florida President for upskilling the health care workforce, exemplifies my dedication to empowering health professionals to integrate artificial intelligence into their careers. In addition to this initiative, I am also leading the development of two new graduate programs at University of Florida College of Medicine - AI for Spatial Biology and AI for Biomedical and Health Sciences. These programs are expected to launch in Fall 2025 for the first time in our new Jacksonville campus.
What differentiates me from other candidates? 
My Hedgehog Concept. The scientific inquiry, curiosity and innovation are genetically encoded in my core. My pursuit of mastering the art of research started at the age of thirteen and has spanned three continents, multiple research questions, and domains and has provided me with happiness in the most challenging times of my life. Co-creating meaningful value with and for all stakeholders through growth in an open and empowered academic organization has inspired and fueled my professional career.           
Broadly trained and experienced physician-scientist. I have multidisciplinary training, board certification, and clinical expertise in five disciplines: internal medicine, nephrology, critical care, neurocritical care, and medical informatics. My research training, experience, and expertise are in basic science and translational kidney and sepsis research, medical bioinformatics, data science, and artificial intelligence. This broad expertise allows me to identify system-wide clinical problems suitable for team science and collaborative transdisciplinary research.    
Cross-disciplinary vision.  My ability to see the big picture that spans scientific disciplines has allowed me to make high-risk and high-yield research and organizational choices and create a clear, compelling purpose and vision that resonates throughout the organization and beyond. I am comfortable with transforming challenges into opportunities using innovation and disruptive processes. I meticulously observe my microsystem and integrate others’ perspectives with original ideas. I work with teams to translate the vision into measurable outcomes.
System thinker. I can discern and act upon patterns and trends in clinical practices and the broader scientific milieu of healthcare. I envision research organization as an open and empowered system that adapts to available resources and balances short-term gains with long-term success. I have successfully secured funding opportunities and resources for growth and development and have applied lean startup methodology as a business model for our research partnership. I used the principles of agile organization to start fast, explore by doing, probe, reflect, and do the next step. 	
Catalyst for partnerships and team building. Throughout my career, I have worked across disciplines to bring a variety of stakeholders to projects. I have a strong network of research and clinical collaborators on the local, national and international level and can assemble effective partnerships with common goals and shared enthusiasm. I have a strong record of productivity in disseminating results for all members of my team. 
Strong leadership within the framework of a distributive leadership model. I adopt a pragmatic and efficient attitude when working with changing priorities. I am receptive to suggestions and willing to change, yet firm in values and proactive direction to maintain forward motion. I govern within the paradigm of a distributive model with excellent skills in assignment and coordination of co-leading roles.
Holistic mentor and advocate for inclusive excellence. I am a survivor of the Bosnian genocide as a religious minority, and my pathway from a refugee to American citizen ran parallel to my professional career. My personal experience of war, persecution, and displacement inevitably shaped my personal and professional interests, beliefs, and alliances. I am an outspoken activist for inclusiveness and equity in medicine, both as a holistic mentor and a catalyst for new ideas and connections. I am focused on both merit and scientific integrity and life-work balance, and humanism. I am committed to building a culture of inclusive excellence that promotes development and leadership opportunities for a diverse biomedical and healthcare workforce. On the national level, I organized educational activities for the professional development for women through my involvement with Women in Nephrology and the American Association of Medical Colleges’ Group on Women in Medicine and Science.